At the beginning of June, an area where orchids are known to occur is inspected twice weekly by park staff to inquire about the orchid stage status. Orchids have been observed to bloom as early as mid-June, but flowering more typically begins during July. Monitoring trips are scheduled to coincide with peak flowering.

The orchid census survey is conducted in all established search units. Each unit is swept for flowering orchids by a crew of 3 - 9 individuals standing side-by-side and roughly 2 meters apart. The search crew begins at one corner of the unit and moves in a straight line (following the search unit boundary) through the area until the search unit is covered. The boundary of the searched area is marked at regular intervals with tall wire flags. On the return sweep, flags are retrieved, and new flags are placed along the opposite boundary of the area searched. The pace of searching should be reasonably slow so that flowering orchids can be seen in the vegetation. Avoiding foot-dragging and limiting crowding around plants minimizes trampling.

When an orchid is encountered during the census survey the crew stops, the orchid heights and flower position is recorded, as well as other attribute information, such as orchid condition. 
Following the census survey, vegetation profile data are collected at specific sites in the orchid units. At least two observers navigate to the vegetation profile sites. At each site, one observer holds the cover board, while the second observer estimates the cover of vegetation using a modified Daubenmire cover class scale at three distances (1m, 5m, and 15m) south of the site in overlapping 0.5m height intervals. This information is documented on a field sheet.

Soil moisture is captured every 2 hours by soil probe starting in 2007. From 2007 - 2014 the Decagon Devices Em50 with the following sensors: moisture at 5cm, 10cm, 20cm, and 40cm depths; temperature at 5cm and 20cm depths; and a rain gage was used. Data was inconsistent with this device for multiple reasons. Some of which are short life of batteries, rain events knocking the rain gage out, and animal/insect destruction. In 2015 the Decagon Devices Em50 with 5TM moisture and temperature sensors at 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40cm depths was installed. 
