Abstract for fish data package

This monitoring dataset consists of fish community data for Buffalo National River, Ozark National Scenic Riverways and multiple prairie stream park units throughout the MidWest. The dataset consists of fish species counts, site conditions along with extensive water quality, habitat, and stream discharge data for fish communities in Heartland Inventory and Monitoring Network Parks.  The dataset includes approximately 115,000 individual fish observations covering over 130 fish species observed at 12 NPS park units taken between 2001 and 2023. The overall goals of Heartland Inventory and Monitoring Network fish community monitoring are to monitor temporal changes in fish communities and relations between the fish communities and environmental factors. This monitoring informationcan be used by park managers to evaluate the effects of past and future activities and management decisions (either by park managers or others) on fish communities. The specific objectives for fish community monitoring are (1) to determine the status and trends in river, springs and small stream fish communities by quantifying metrics (e.g. species richness, percent tolerant individuals, percent invertivores, and percent omnivores) that can be used to calculate multi-metric indices and (2) to estimate the spatial andtemporal variability of fish community metric values and indices among collection sites, and determine 4 Methods for Monitoring Fish Communities of Buffalo National River and Ozark National Scenic Riverways, Version 2.0 relations between metrics and indices with various environmental variables (e.g. stream size, riparian characteristics, substrate characteristics, water quality, and land use).




Methods



Sampling Design for this project consisted of establishing permanent sampling reaches for each park unit, then collecting fish community data and associated habitat data at each reach.  The field data collection consisted of (1) collecting initial water quality data, (2) sampling fish within the reach and then processing fish samples, (3) collecting habitat data, (4) collecting water discharge data and (5) collecting final measures of water quality. Fish were sampled either using eletrofish methods for large rivers, springs and streams or seine methods for small prairie streams where species of concern were known to occur. Water quality and site condition measures included weather conditions,  water temparature, and CORE 5 water quality measures (pH, specific conductance, conductivity, dissolved oxygen and water turbidity). Habitat measures were taken using point-transect method and included measures of channel morphology, fish cover, and bank conditions. Water discharge measures were taken both by direct measures in the field at the reach site and from nearby hydrologic gauge stations. 


Methodology protocols supporting this project include - for small streams - Dodd HR and Others. 2021. Protocol for Monitoring Fish Communities in Small Streams in the Heartland Inventory and Monitoring Network: Version 2.0. Natural Resource Report. NPS/HTLN/NRR—2021/2235. National Park Service. Fort Collins, Colorado. https://doi.org/10.36967/nrr-2284726; for springs - Dodd HR and Others. 2021. Protocol for monitoring spring communities at Ozark National Scenic River-ways, Missouri: Version 2.0. Natural Resource Report. NPS/HTLN/NRR—2021/2231. National Park Service. Fort Collins, Colorado. https://doi.org/10.36967/nrr-2284630; and for large rivers - Dodd HR and Others. 2018. Methods for monitoring fish communities of Buffalo National River and Ozark National Scenic Riverways in the Ozark Plateaus of Arkansas and Missouri, Version 2.0. Natural Resource Report. NPS/HTLN/NRR—2018/1633. National Park Service. Fort Collins, Colorado.


